<div align="center">
    <h1>automower2mqtt</h1>
    <strong>A basic MQTT gateway for the Husqvarna Automower® Cloud API</strong>
</div>

Husqvarna Automower®, unfortunately, does not provide a local API, even though the device is
capable of connecting to WiFi. This tool provides a basic homie-compliant(ish) MQTT proxy between
the API and your home control things, so you don't have to bake in the API logic into your home
automation system.

> [!NOTE]
> The implementation currently in a pretty crude state meant to only serve exactly my personal
> needs. Suggestions and improvements are very welcome. I do try to not overcomplicate the
> implementation too much with layers of abstraction or complexity, so it should be relatively
> approachable to you (or your AI agent.)
>
> Please do not submit changes that haven't had human review, however.

## Configuration

The `automower2mqtt` tool is configured via command line arguments and environment variables.
Run `automower2mqtt --help` for up-to date documentation here.

## Controlling the mower

### Background

MQTT and the automower API have a strong impedance mismatch, so the changes to the mower operation
are implemented in a fairly ad-hoc manner that does not necessarily make the interface very DRY
(dont-repeat-yourself.)

For instance this bridge exposes automower telemetry via MQTT properties such as
`$prefix/mower/mode=MAIN_AREA|SECONDARY_AREA|HOME|...`,
`$prefix/mower/activity=MOWING|CHARGING|...`, `$prefix/mower/state=IN_OPERATION|PAUSED|...` and
similar atributes that are reflected verbatim from the API. However these make it relatively
difficult to expose as settable properties that describe the intent. As in, saying "I want my mower
to park now" could be expressed in one of `mower.mode=HOME`, `planner.PARK_NOW`,
`mower.state=RESTRICTED`, etc. Each would have non-obvious differences in behaviour, for example
`mode=HOME` is the telemetry you get when you "Park until further notice" in the app, whereas "Park
until next schedule" would be `planner.override=PARK_NOW`. `RESTRICTED` parking would require to
somehow also specify the restricted code, which would require synchronization between multiple
properties.

Instead this bridge introduces separate properties that are intent focused and potentially
overlapping in their meaning.

### Examples of settable properties

The up-to-date and exhaustive list is available in the published Homie `$description` as well as in
the source code. This text provides some most prominent examples:

* `$prefix/mower/paused/set = true|false`: true will pause the mower, false will “resume”
* `$prefix/mower/mowing/set = yes|no`: inverted behaviour to paused. `yes` will “resume”. Separate
  attribute to later allow for potentially specifying forced mowing.
* `$prefix/mower/parked/set = yes|no|until-next-schedule`: `yes` will park until further notice,
  `until-next-schedule` is self-explanatory, `no` will “resume”.
* `$prefix/settings/headlight-mode = ALWAYS_ON|ALWAYS_OFF|EVENING_ONLY|EVENING_AND_NIGHT`;

### External inhibits

If you have configured `--external-inhibit`s, you can have your mower return back to the charging
station in reaction to external events such as rain, a BBQ party or whatever else you can imagine.

Lets say we have a rain sensor and want to prevent wet cuttings sticking to the mower. Start by
specifying the `--external-inhibit rain=200100:1500`. This will create a new property
`$prefix/planner/external-inhibit-rain` which can be either `enable`d or `disable`d. Have your
automation system periodically (every 30 minutes, perhaps?) send `enable` to this property's `/set`
as long as rain is being detected. Once the rain stops and your automation stops sending the
`enable` command, the mower will continue waiting for 25 further hours (1500 minutes as specified
in the argument) for the lawn to dry off a bit more.

You can specify as many such different inhibitors as you want. You might want another one for `dew`
that prevents mowing just for an hour or two on certain mornings, or a `bbq` inhibitor that lasts
for 8 hours so that the mower does not interfere with your party.
